This is the QuickSource source distribution for Sakai 1.5.1.

The QuickSource distribution is designed to facilitate the installation
of a production version of Sakai customized to the local
environment. The aspects of Sakai that would typically be customized
are the skins, the provider, and the database connection.  To support
customization the QuickSource distribution delivers the source of Sakai
pre-configured to compile using the development tools and environment
as described on the Sakai release website 
(http://cvs.sakaiproject.org/release/1.5.1/sakaidev.html).
Please consult the Sakai website on how to setup that environment.

QuickSource includes the Help, Syllabus, and Presentation tools in
addition to the base Sakai distribution.  The Samigo (Tests and
Quizzes) tool is also provided.  For 1.5 release Samigo requires a
different build environment so the source is provided in a separate
directory. Please follow the instructions on installing Samigo found
in accompanying QuickSource_SAMIGO_README.TXT.  With the Sakai 2.0
release Samigo will build in the same environment as Sakai.

The QuickSource environment is designed for local installation changes
but it is NOT designed as a tool development environment.  Therefore
the source directories are not configured to connect to the Sakai CVS
server.  To create a tool development environment please consult the
Sakai release website at the address given above.

In addition to the Sakai 1.5.1 release website at:
http://cvs.sakaiproject.org/release/1.5.1/index.html).  There is a
1.5.1 space in the Sakai Confluence instance at
http://bugs.sakaiproject.org/confluence/display/REL/1.5.1.  The
contents of the FAQ are based on your needs so please contribute your
questions and your answers.

$Header: /cvs/quickstart/qs-1-5-1/docs/QuickSource_README.TXT,v 1.5 2005/05/18 15:26:07 dlhaines.umich.edu Exp $